 right now we will continue with the cerebrospinal fluid and in this session we are going to discuss the functions of cerebrospinal fluid. a little bit review on what we have done in the last lecture that we were talking about the cerebrospinal fluid as the special type of fluid which is present in the cavities within the central nervous system plus it is also present around the centilouver system in the subarachnoid space. and we discussed in the last lecture that cerebrospinal fluid is produced mainly by the coroid plexus which is present in the lateral ventricle from where CSF through the foramen of Monroe enters into third ventricle. there more CSF is added by the coroid plexus which is present in the roof of the third ventricle. then CSF from the third ventricle moves through the cerebral equiduct or equiductus salvius to the fourth ventricle from the fourth ventricle of course it goes down fill up all the central canal of the spinal cord right then it will escape from the fourth ventricle to the subarachnoid space through two lateral openings which are called foramen luschka and through a posterior median opening which is called foramen megeni. these foramen leshkat allows the CSF to move from the central nervous system to subarachnoid space which is called a very dilated subarachnoid space which is called it's a cistern cerebelo pontine cistern and through the foramen megeni CFS is coming into cisterna magna or cerebellum medullary system and then CSF moves out it goes down fill up all the subarachnoid space around the spinal cord is that right where there is a very special landmark here that yes in adult person the lower end of the spinal cord is somewhere at L1 or L2 level right and CSF cavity right extend up to S2 level right? and this is a point where you can puncture and take a sample of CSF. is that right? we'll discuss in detail number puncture later. CSF moves from here upward in the sub arachnoid space. it goes under the cerebral hemisphere on the sides of the cerebral hemisphere and then eventually in the top of the cerebral hemisphere. from there it goes into arachnoid villi and granulations right.. which are extensions of the arachnoid matter and special structures which are protruding into dural sinuses especially superior sagittal sinus and CSF is here moving into venous blood.. is that right? am I clear to everyone? now another thing with the age these arachnoid villi and granulation become more thicker more numerous right and even calcified with older age right now let's talk about the functions of the cerebrospinal fluid function of functions of cerebrospinal fluid is that right it has many functions right one of the very important function is that it act as a cushion around the central nervous system. it act as a cushion around the central nervous system. as you see that central nervous system is floating in the CSF which is present around the central nervous system in subarachnoid space right. and advantage of this thing is that if there is day to day we get a small jerk to overhead right it does not injure the central nervous system right it protects the central nervous system right now let me give you some example of this again I'm going to draw the lateral view suppose this is your central nervous system and here I make the lateral view now in the skull let's suppose here is the skull I'm not I'm not going to draw all of the structure okay your nose should be a little better right now this is the CSF in sub-raconite space is that right and central nervous system is floating in that now what is the real advantage the real advantage is because it is floating into that this fluid around the central the system in the sub-dragonite space act as a cushion right against injuries but there are special type of situations in which there is very severe injury right for example if someone get a very severe injury on the back of the skull right what will happen what do you think more chances that occipital lobe will be injured or more chances that frontal lobe will be injured more chances more chances that frontal lobe will be injured if skull is not fractured of course if a severe injury if the skull is fractured we call it depressed skull fractures of course this lobe will be suffering but usually when there are roadside accidents so your head hit with something right for either from the front or from the back that injury is unexpectedly not just under the part of the skull right rather it is on the far end let me explain how it really happens actually what happens that let's suppose you are hit here with a blunt object what will happen that skull will move rapidly forward skull will move suddenly forward now brain is floating in that when this piece of skull this has been hit very strongly now when this will move forward the fluid which is present here.. immediate under it.. right.. this is not compressible.. fluids are usually not.. fluids are not compressible like gases.. gases can be compressed.. fluids cannot be compressed.. so when it is hit over there.. skull rapidly moves.. but due to inertia brain does not have that tendency to move immediately.. but because this fluid is non compressible.. it protect this area.. but when this skull moves forward rapidly and this point moves forward there is a temporary vacuum produced here right negative pressure produced at this point am i clear that you have hit here how this point is protected because fluid here is not compressible so the skull moves but it does not hit it at this point the real problem occurs that interior part of the skull when you have posterior blunt injury interior part of skull rapidly moves and brain due to inertia may not move that fast some degree of vacuum is produced here but as soon as after moving skull suddenly skull stop this energy this vacuum is collapsed and frontal pole will hit here this type of injury am i clear to you people you really understand it good IQ now this injury is called counter coup injury this type of injury to the brain this point of the brain which is injured we call it counter coup injury. this is the concept of counter coup injuries after the injury to the skull right? that if you initially injuries on the back of the skull but you are surprised that patient is having frontal lobe dysfunction or someone has injury directly in the frontal bones frontal aspect of the skull and patient has clinical neurological dysfunction related with the occipital lobe am i clear but sometimes of course that you hit here and if this you can say skull is depressed and this area is injured as well this is called this injury will be called coupe injury this is called coupe injury that's very good is that right but counter coup injury is more common than coup injury am I really clear no question about it right but thank God this coup injuries and counter coup injuries are not so common because CSF keep on working as a protective layer around the central nervous system another special very special function of CSF is function number two but first I will write down the first function that was? yes cushioning it's a central nervous system cushion and protection right then there is a very very special function of CSF you know CSF specific gravity and brain specific gravity are almost same and it has a big implication specific gravity of CSF and specific gravity of central nervous system is almost same and it has a very big implication the big implication is brain floats you get it because their specific gravity is same so brain will not sink into CSF it will float in the CSF and due to floating there's a very big advantage what is that advantage let me tell you the brain if you hold a human brain or brain weight in the dry air that is about 1400 kg I'm talking about human brain my friend it is grams I don't know whom you met with the was only brain right it is 1000 approximately 400 grams not milligram no kg right this is the weight of the central nervous system the dry air but But you know what is the weight of the central nervous system in the CSF when it is floating? It will increase or decrease? It will decrease. It is only 50 gram. That is the beauty. Sometimes when I think of all the way human beings are designed, I am impressed by the intelligence with which we are designed. Now weight of the central nervous system is just 50 gram. If you don't understand it, floating things have a relatively less weight due to buoyancy the fluid for example if you have a small boat and you have to move that boat on the dry land it is difficult but can you little bit move in water why because overall weight is reduced due to buoyancy of the water in the same way central nervous system which is 1400 grams right and if it is not floating it will sink it will injure its nerves at the foramina and maybe when you jump like this it's like a big stone moving in and out and you know all the time we'll have big helmets around our head because if it's weight remain 1400 grams all the time and not there's no CSF what will happen little bit movement will injure the brain is that right for every activity you will have a big helmet at least other does not bump with your head.. am i right? now the beauty is because specific gravity of central nervous system and the CSFH same so central nervous system floats and when central nervous system floats right when central nervous system is floating its weight is very less and when weight is very less central nervous system can be kept suspended at its place within the cranial cavity with very flimsy and delicate sports you know what are the real delicate sports which keep the central nervous system floating in a proper way very little sport for example nerves are coming out you know third nerve fourth nerve fifth nerve these nerves are going to the foramina right then there are arteries and veins which are entering to central nervous system right and then there are subarachnoid what are these? prabhukulai which are very very thin so these are very small spores that brain is floating in the fluid and it is kept at its position relatively fixated and well suspended well suspended due to just nerves which are connecting it just few vessels which entering in and out and of course very fine and delicate arachnoid.. trabeculae and if CSF is not there do you think heavy weight brain can be suspended with such a delicate type of structures no and the proof of this is let me tell you that if through lumbar puncture you remove unfortunately excessive amount of CSF then what will happen that brain cannot be kept floating well and it will drag on the nerves and arteries and veins and these structures are pain sensitive and person will develop severe pain that is why sometimes some people after the lumbar puncture when you have withdrawn excessive amount of CSF they develop severe headaches and that headache can be very easily relieved by yeah by injecting normal saline sterile of course sterile normal saline intrathecally intrathecally means through the dura mater into subarachnoid space and then you again let the central nervous system float well and no traction on the nerves and arteries and pain disappears am I really clear right so there were two functions one function was cushion and cushioning and protective function otherwise sporting and buoyancy..right.. keeping reducing its weight and keeping its suspended with delicate structures.. these are two basic mechanical functions of cerebrospinal fluid..right.. then there is another function of CSF that CSF act as a reservoir and assist in regulation of content of the content of cranial cavity right it act as yes it act as a serves as a reservoir as a reservoir and controls regulates intracranial content what I mean by this that let's suppose if someone brain is a little bit shrunken with age brain will little bit shrink so CSF will increase so that because skull is a fixed cavity you know am i clear so CSF will be increasing is that right or if there is a slight swelling of central nervous system CSF can decrease but of course if there is a big very big swelling that will raise intracranial pressure but to a very small degree csf does play a rule to regulate the you can say content of the skull then another function of csf is it nourishes the central nervous system it act as a nourishing fluid nourishes nourishes central nervous system. I want to highlight one point here that let me make the CSF again. That CSF fluid has the same composition as interstitial fluid of central nervous system right suppose this is your central nervous system right and you know that this is cerebrospinal fluid around it this is cerebrospinal fluid around it and let's suppose here are the neurons it's a very simple diagram and let's suppose here is the blood vessel okay this is a blood vessel which is going to the central nervous system and here the vein coming out blood going from here and coming out through there actually everything from the blood cannot freely move to interstitial fluid of central nervous system later on i will tell you that this concept is blood brain barrier the concept of blood brain barrier is that there is some barrier between the blood and the brain fluid right and everything which is present in the blood does not passes to the interstitial fluid or extracellular fluid in the central nervous system because neurons have to work in a very constant and very private environment is that right and why it is so let me bring this vessel out this vessel has here capillaries this was the arterial end this was a venous end here are the neurons right now everything which is present in the blood right is not going out in interstitial fluid right.. later on they came to know that this is basically due to endothelial cell.. the endothelial cell which are here.. they are very tightly held together.. they are very strong and tight junction.. right.. so they allow few substances to move to the interstitial fluid of the brain but they do not allow every substance to move.. especially substances which are highly polar or large molecule they're not allowed to move is that right? but the fluid from the CSF can freely move and exchange with the interstitial fluid of the brain so this two fluid the fluid present here and fluid present here this is interstitial fluid of the brain or extracellular fluid in the brain and this is CSF these are in exchange relationship with each other due to this reason extracellular fluid in the brain and excess cell of fluid and the sub-regnet CSF or CSF in the ventricle right they have similar composition they have similar composition there is no privacy in between am i clear now due to this reason the nutrients which are present in the CSF they can very easily go to the fluid of the excess of fluid of the brain and nourish the neurons that is why we can say the CSF can work as a nourishing fluid also to the central nervous system but at the same time when neurons or other glial cells are producing waste product these waste product will of course come into interstitial fluid some of these will diffuse into CSF. it means CSF act not only as a nourishing fluid but it also act as a vehicle to remove some of the waste products. am i clear? really? Abdul Salam you really understand it? I'm surprised. right so not only it act as a nourishing fluid it also act as a metabolic waste removal metabolic waste removal and how do you understand these two statement? because CSF is in free exchange right between the interstitial fluid or extracellular fluid of central nervous system and CSF present in the ventricular cavities and CSF present in subarachnoid space. it means pya matter is not a big barrier for the fluid exchange. Paya matter is between the subarachnoid space and the brain substance. so pya matter does have a supportive and protective covering property but it is it allows the fluid and many diffusible substances to move in either direction. am i clear? then CSF has one more function. what is that? the function of CSF... who will tell me? please... it carries the hormones around within the central nervous system... for example pineal gland... you know this pineal gland in central nervous system... who can tell me the exact position of pineal gland in this diagram... I will invite Jessica... yes can you really put the tip of this marker where is the pineal gland okay anyone who can really tell maybe anyone none of you know where is the pineal gland okay have you heard of this thing yeah this third ventricle yeah on the third ventricle okay I will draw the third ventricle for your comfort so that you tell me exactly where it is It is the midbrain right and here is your beautiful third ventricle right now it looks beautiful why because it is your center of attention right it has lady like behavior once it is center of attention it turns more beautiful of course these are two foramen monroe now where is the pineal gland I will give you the choices one the site number one two three four five so just tell me which is the position of the pineal gland excellent who was right okay Jessica and Ronald very right on the back of this right on the back of the third ventricle this is protruding backward and this is called pineal gland and where is the hypothalamus here near one position and here is pituitary these are papillary body..manually bodies and third ventricle actually truly extend into that area we'll discuss that into detail later anyway what I wanted to say that this funny pineal gland releases its special very special type of products into CSF and from there these products may keep on moving around the CSF and then go to pituitary gland and regulate the release of many hormones am i clear is that right so CSF has one more function it carries around the hormonal product in central nervous system is that clear okay after having said all of this let's come to some more features related with the cerebrospinal fluid for example what it is volume what is its secretion rate, what is its chemical composition, right? what is the pressure of CSF, right? some important features related with the CSF. what is the volume of CSF in a healthy brain of course yes very right it is around 130 millimeter of ml not millimeters right around 130 ml that's very good answer and daily production of it is around 500 to 600 ml right you can say 500 or 550 ml per day is the daily secretion. it means every day three to four times your whole CSF is changed. new CSF is made and drained. am i clear? then it means every minute about 0.5 ml CSF is secreted every minute. is it really clear? then what is pressure of CSF pressure actually pressure is measured when you do the lumbar puncture patient or person is lying on the couch left lateral position horizontally then you do lumbar puncture at L4 around L4 either L3 L4 or L4 L5 around L4 right now there when you push the lumbar puncture needle right you attach the manometer with that you may know the pressure of the CSF the pressure of CSF is about 60 to 160 what millimeter of water millimeter of water is that right? so this was volume rate of secretion and pressure in the normal person right related with the CSF then we come to the composition of CSF of course to determine the composition of CSF we take the sample of the CSF is that right and the sample of the CSF is taken from lumbar puncture you know really how lumbar puncture is done you want to know few important point related with that okay let me tell you lumbar puncture what really happens that patient is lying on a couch was that right I don't know how to make a patient okay just trust me this is a patient right the knees are generally really bent and I will not make due to legal reasons I will not make the rest of it Now what is there that yeah you understand what I making iliac crest that good what is it there's something called thecrum okay here are actually patient is lying in which position now left lateral position and lying with joints the iliac crest right? hypothetically the line which joins the iliac crest right? you have to keep that in mind and here are your what are these vertebras? is that right? the line which joins the iliac crest that is at L4 right? with the finger you palpate the interspinous area because every vertebra has spine so you have to find a interspinous area and if L4 is just under it either you will puncture above phallic to the L4 or caudal to the L4. L4 means lumbar vertebra fourth. is that clear murtaza? then what you have to do get somehow the patient on the left lateral position and then you have to identify this point and this is the real site where you will do the lumbar puncture right but they're very important point before you really do it because no one is very happy about it or enthusiastic to get it right so if it is really needed you have to get consent of the patient you have to explain the procedure to the patient is that right and you have to take the consent and very important thing you have to tell the patient that during the procedure he can communicate to you if he really want say something is that right then and you have to tell the patient that this procedure will be done properly only with his cooperation because we have to get the patient into this position then knees should be folded with the chin right advantage of and then once you identify this point of course you mark that and clean that with antiseptic is that right and then you will take the needle and you will push needle towards the towards the umbilicus not up to the umbilicus please it's a very small needle right it's you should not laugh like me I'm laughing because all of you are laughing and I'd like to exchange the smile otherwise this is not the moment to laugh right what really happens that you have to point your needle towards the imaginary line towards the bleikas of the patient.. bleikas of the patient right.. so as needle will be going in it will pierce pass through or pierce certain structures eventually it reaches to sub racnet space and then CSF come out.. now what do you think which structures will be pierced? this is very important question yes structure number one please tell me skin right and then when you're passing the needle usually patient has a skin there is that right so skin and of course subcutaneous yeah fascia then then there are ligaments you know there are spine and spines are held together by ligaments right then ligaments will way which ligaments yes supraspinous ligament spinous ligament then there are interspinous should I make really a diagram proper so you understand how these ligaments are there okay this is vertebral body This is the spine, this is the vertebra, here is the spinal cord, is that right? And around it there must be pia matter here, just immediate around the spinal cord, right? Then there is what is this sub arachnoid? So arachnoid matter and then outside what is this here? yes please... dura matter... is that right? and of course if this is vertebra here there must be another vertebra at the top of it and your needle is coming from this direction back to the front this is the interior side and this is posterior side am i clear? so there are ligaments from here from spine going to the next spine and this ligament is called supraspinous ligament then another group ligament here this is called interspinous ligament then still another ligament very close just entering before this is called ligamentum flavum so how many ligaments you are crossing this is your first ligament what is this one supra spinous then this crosses this ligament what is this ligament interspinous then it has to cross another ligament what is this one ligamentum flavum so supraspinous is crossed then enter spinous ligament is crossed then yes ligamentum it's a beautiful name flavum yeah you don't understand something yeah it is somewhat yellow color cartilage type ligamentum flavum it doesn't have any type of good flavor right once you have gone through the ligaments right then where you will reach you will be just outside the dura matter and the space outside the dura matter is epidural space epidural space remember epidural space in the cranial cavity is only potential space but in vertebral column epidural space is really there and it has some fat, loose reolar tissue, some lymphatics and some veins.. is that right? it's really there.. are you understanding or I should make this diagram more clear? it's clear? that's good.. so epidural space and of course after that what you repairs? thank God you know after that dura mater should be there.. very good.. high IQ again from Mr. Abdul.. then of course again any other person with high IQ. After the durameter there should be? Oh my god! subdural space. I don't know your IQ is too much fluctuating my friend right after the durameter there should be subdural space and don't try to run that shuttle in space it is not as that space which we talk about other things it's a very small area so durameter subdural space and of course after that what will come? arachnoid matter arachnoid matter and after that yes now as soon as you pierce the arachnoid matter you enter into sub arachnoid space of course which is having CSF and then after that what you will pierce? after that you should not pierce anything. Paya metter is not pierced because if you touch the Paya metter it means you are going to damage the spinal cord because Paya metter is always in very intimate relationship closely plastered over the central nervous system or attached with the central nervous system so Paya is not pierced so actually when you are pushing your needle initially you feel the resistance of the ligaments then you feel another resistance of dura matter after that you are in subarachnoid phase then what you do from the needle you remove still it and drops of CSF will start coming out and if you apply attach the manometer with that you will know what is the pressure and then you will take the samples of CSF in different bottles of course steel oil and clean is that right for chemical analysis and other purposes then what you do you remove the needle of course and apply the bandage there and traditionally they say patient should remain lying for one hour flat is that right am I clear to everyone so this is how you sample CSF any question up to this I don't know all of you are very interested in lumbar puncture are you sadistic people or what but something painful for the patient or unpleasant for the patient and from pain I remember you must give you must give what you give for pain local anesthetic before the procedure is that right am I clear okay yeah I am teaching them in the end so that that should be remembered. How many mils of CSF can you withdraw safely? yeah this is very important how much mls you can withdraw safely more important question before that is that never withdraw cs try to withdraw csf if there's raised intracranial pressure this is raised intracranial intracranial pressure is contraindication to the lumbar puncture why because if pressure in the cs if intracranial pressure is high maybe there's a big tumor or swelling and as soon as from this area you pull the CSF out brain will herniate right through foramen magnum.. medulla will come down and maybe the lower part of tonsillar part of the cerebellum and that all that gets crushed and patient dies.. is that right? and how you know that patient has really raised intracranial pressure before doing the lumbar puncture? because it is not written on the patient here that I have a raised intracranial pressure don't do lumbar puncture yeah usually we withdraw CSF about 5 to 10 ml per bottle and usually we take about 3 bottles is that right yeah but it should be better to keep it low yes please who will tell me that how do you really know patient has raised intracranial pressure or not before you do the lumbar puncture or you the patient do you have and do you think patient is going to tell you? yes anyone has good idea that how do you know that is raised intracranial pressure? there is a very dangerous black star with five points number one patient has a history of headache and this headache is usually present already when patient wake up any headache which is present already when you wake up however mild it is it should be considered serious is there any unexplained headache right when a person has already as soon as you wake up he realize he has headache unexplained but if you have been hit by someone yesterday night of course there is well-explained headache right so any unexplained headache right that raises suspicion of the raised intracranial pressure because in lying down for a long time right fluid accumulates there and if there is raised intracranial pressure that become further raised and that produces headache number one number two is there is yes papilledema you know what is papilledema okay let me tell you if you do ophthalmoscopy you know ophthalmoscopy right with the ophthalmoscope you look through the pupil on the retina is that right normally if you look at the retina it looks like this what is this optic disc this is the point where optic nerve is attached with the eyeball or in the retina am i clear optic disc now normally the margins of optic disc are very sharp and clear if there is papilledema if right if this is this is called papilla if it is edematous then they are no more clear they look like this the margins are blurred due to edema and in raised intracranial pressure there is papilledema raised intracranial pressure may be due to severe meningitis inflammation of meninges or due to encephalitis inflammation of the brain or raised intracranial pressure may be due to tumors or raised intracranial pressure may be due to hemorrhages or any space occupying lumen cranial cavity may lead to high intracranial pressure and all these situations lumbar puncture is contraindicated is that right someone can explain why the patient develop papilledema due to when they have raised intracranial pressure? do you really want to know the answer or we move forward that why raised intracranial pressure produces papilledema? you want to know it okay then I have to draw a diagram this thing may not be very relevant with this lecture but it is extremely relevant with your career that every doctor should know that what are the important signs and symptoms related with raised intracranial pressure right now pepulodema why it develops let me tell you okay this is i make central nervous system this is central nervous system and what is this fluid around here if this is subarachnoid space what is this fluid CSF is that right and whenever there is some tumor in the brain or there is swelling of the brain or there's inflammation of the meninges under all these things cranial cavity cannot expand so pressure in the cranial cavity goes up so intracranial pressure is high now listen carefully what is this this is dura this is dura matter I have not drawn the subracnoid and pia for simplicity this is a dura matter now listen carefully actually here is your eyeball this is your eyeball okay let me make it little bit beautiful here should be lens and suspensory ligament this is your eyeball is that right now actually from here these are the neuronal this is a retina and from here what is this going out? optic nerve and optic nerve is of course connected with the central nervous system is that right? this is optic nerve going to the chiasma that we'll discuss later these are the fibers of optic nerve am i clear? no problem in this diagram? actually now this is the beauty of understanding durameter moves, makes a sleeve around the optic nerve. if durameter is making a sleeve around the optic nerve then it means CSF is also going around the optic nerve up to this point. am i right? I hope you will never forget this diagram in your life until you are going to deal with the patients that CSF is around the optic nerve why because optic nerve is covered by the pia matter and then it has subarachnoid matter and optic nerve as a outer covering as dura matter and there's a special news optic nerve is not a nerve it is a central nervous system tract we wrongly call it nerve is that right optic nerve is a not typical peripheral nerve. it is actually central nervous system track. proof is that it is covered by all the layers of central nervous system plus its myelin sheath of the optic nerve is not made by Schwann cell. Schwann cells are the myelinating cells of peripheral nervous system. optic nerve has myelinating cells of central nervous system and central nervous system tracks are myelinated by oligodendrocyte, optic nerve is also myelinated by oligodendrocyte peripheral nerves are myelinated by Schwann cell, optic nerve is myelinated by oligodendrocyte, central nervous system tracks are myelinated by oligodendrocyte. so diseases of oligodendrocyte will make disease in the central track and also in optic nerve and diseases of Schwann cell will make peripheral nerve diseases but not optic nerve. now you understand the whole story? now another thing. here is retinal artery going. you must be knowing that retinal artery is a branch of ophthalmic artery. you know it already I suppose. now retinal artery going to the retina but when it is going to retina it passes through what area? where says the dura mater of the optic nerve passes through sub-regnet space, retinal artery passes through CSF then pyrometer end into what is this? optic nerve and then it supplies the retinal branches to the retina. am i clear? of course then there should be retinal vein.. central retinal vein also this was central retinal artery central retinal vein bring the blood out backward vein should drain and this also passes through all those areas central retinal vein. now you see this is central retinal artery of course blood is going in that direction. so it means central retinal artery and veins pass through sub retinal space around the optic nerve. am I really clear to everyone? now if there is due to any reason if intracranial pressure is high you know cranial cavity is not an expandable cavity so if someone developed tumor or big hemorrhage or someone develops a big infection in central nervous system or swelling so pressure in the central you know due to that reason when things swell up in inside the cranial cavity pressure in the CSF will go down or up so when pressure CSF pressure will become high then cerebral spinal fluid which is around the optic nerve that will have low pressure or high pressure high pressure is that really clear now you imagine retinal artery is artery arterial system as compared to the venous system arterial system is high pressure system low pressure system high pressure and as compared to arteries venous system is low pressure pressure in the arteries is high and pressure in the veins is low. now you imagine if you have raised intracranial pressure then CSF is under high pressure in the optic nerve retinal artery itself is high pressure vessel in spite of high CSF it will still take the blood to the retina but retinal vein which is draining the blood back is compressed by the high pressure of CSF is that right let me show you this is the optic nerve a durameter here it is what is this optic optic nerve artery cannot be compressed by high pressure but vein can be compressed by right and CSF pressure here is very high and raise endocrine pressure so when vein is compressed blood is going but cannot drain well the pressure in the microcirculation of retina goes up and edema develops and that leads to that funny papilledema edema accumulates especially around the optic disc margin am I really clear and this one more reason fluid of CSF right it also tracks through the nerve bundles and also goes over there. that also add to the papillary edema. but as a single cause if you want to remember the single cause of mechanism of papillary edema you say papillary edema develops in cases of raised intracranial pressure because that optic nerve has a sleeve of durameter and subarachnoid space. so optic nerve is all the time bathing in CSF and and the central retinal arteries and central retinal vein pass through that space. when there's a high endocrine pressure CSF pressure is high. high pressure of the CSF compresses the retinal vein. so drainage of retinal fluid is not well and edema develops in the retina which specially accumulate around the optic disc and optic disc become edematous and we say patient has papilledema. so it's so easy that you are doing you are going to do lumbar puncture you just do ophthalmoscopy and look at optic disc. if it is its margins are blurred then please don't do lumbar puncture. patient's life will also blur and your professional career may also blur. is that clear? that means there is high pressure in the CSF? yeah. papilledema mean there is high pressure in the CSF. is that right? so two features of raised intracranial pressure I discussed number one was headache number two papilledema third feature of raised intracranial pressure is projectile vomiting raised intracranial pressure right it disrupts the GIT regulating centers in medulla and vagus nerve is disturbed. you know vagus nerve is coming out of medulla do you know that? okay that's good. so what really happens when raised intracranial pressure is there right brain is little bit herniating downward vagus nerve is disturbed and you know vagus nerve supplies the GIT and control the motility of the GIT regulate so when it is firing too much patient may develop retro-propulsions and a vomiting which is projectile vomiting. what is meant by the projectile vomiting? no projectile vomiting means Abdul is sitting here and I vomit beyond him. is that right? that is projectile vomiting and he will be spared. don't be upset. is that right? I mean this type of vomiting is a characteristic of small children. very small children have normal vomiting projectile only mama knows is that right but when we become adult our vomiting is really not that thank God not that projector right but in adult life if you redevelop your projectile vomiting maybe one of the reason is raised intracranial pressure then another two more classic features of raised intracranial pressure are progressively rising blood pressure every hour you take the blood pressure of the patient it keeps on going up and progressively falling pulse rate. I will explain why. Patient has progressively rising blood pressure and progressively falling pulse rate. For example if raised intracranial pressure is there, now pulse may be 60 and after a few hours it may be 50, still after a few hours if it may become 40. Why? Because vagus is again irritated and Vegas in cardio stimulant or cardio inhibitor? inhibitor. so when heart rate is reduced of course pulse will go down and why blood pressure goes up because when there's high pressure in central nervous system then do you think blood can easily enter into central nervous system? no. so blood flow to central nervous system reduces and ischemia develop and ischemia of central nervous system produces immense sympathetic overflow which constrict many vessels in the body and your blood pressure goes up. that is an attempt of the vast vessels of the body to constrict and push the blood to ischemic brain. is that right? but you want me to revise it? okay listen. cranial cavity cannot be expanded. it's a fixed cavity. due to any reason if pressure in the cranial cavity become too much, do you think then blood which is going to central of the system, blood flow will increase to CNS or decrease? when blood flow to CNS will decrease central nervous system will develop ischemia when central nervous system develops significant ischemia it produces intense sympathetic overflow sympathetic fibers fire and many vessels in the body constrict right in a way all the vessels are squeezing the blood towards the central nervous system right so due to that reason if you take blood pressure that will be high but due to over sympathetic stimulation heart rate does not go out go up because vagal stimulation is very severe which inhibits the heart rate overrides the sympathetic stimulation to the heart rate. Sympathetic nervous system try to stimulate the heart rate but parasympathetic definitely inhibits. Is that right? So if you come across a patient who complains of some headache which is especially present on lying down, you look at the optic disc and you find this papillary edema projectile vomiting is there and progressively blood pressure is going up and pulse rate is going down you must suspect strongly that there is raised intracranial pressure and don't plan lumbar puncture am I clear? okay after this now we come to yes we'll talk about that later in some other lectures. I think I want to go back to the CSF. let's talk about some basic composition of CSF and how this composition of CSF is disturbed in yes different type of infections of meninges. you know when meninges Leptomeninges are inflamed we say that there is there is meningitis